<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>The Careys made up their minds to send Philip to King’s School at Tercanbury. The neighbouring clergy sent their sons there. It was united by long tradition to the Cathedral: its headmaster was an honorary Canon, and a past headmaster was the Archdeacon. Boys were encouraged there to aspire to Holy Orders, and the education was such as might prepare an honest lad to spend his life in God’s service. A preparatory school was attached to it, and to this it was arranged that Philip should go. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carey took him into Tercanbury one Thursday afternoon towards the end of September. All day Philip had been excited and rather frightened. He knew little of school life but what he had read in the stories of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Boy’s Own Paper</i>. He had also read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eric, or Little by Little</i>.</p>
			<p>When they got out of the train at Tercanbury, Philip felt sick with apprehension, and during the drive in to the town sat pale and silent. The high brick wall in front of the school gave it the look of a prison. There was a little door in it, which opened on their ringing; and a clumsy, untidy man came out and fetched Philip’s tin trunk and his play-box. They were shown into the drawing-room; it was filled with massive, ugly furniture, and the chairs of the suite were placed round the walls with a forbidding rigidity. They waited for the headmaster.</p>
			<p>“What’s <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson like?” asked Philip, after a while.</p>
			<p>“You’ll see for yourself.”</p>
			<p>There was another pause. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carey wondered why the headmaster did not come. Presently Philip made an effort and spoke again.</p>
			<p>“Tell him I’ve got a clubfoot,” he said.</p>
			<p>Before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carey could speak the door burst open and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson swept into the room. To Philip he seemed gigantic. He was a man of over six feet high, and broad, with enormous hands and a great red beard; he talked loudly in a jovial manner; but his aggressive cheerfulness struck terror in Philip’s heart. He shook hands with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carey, and then took Philip’s small hand in his.</p>
			<p>“Well, young fellow, are you glad to come to school?” he shouted.</p>
			<p>Philip reddened and found no word to answer.</p>
			<p>“How old are you?”</p>
			<p>“Nine,” said Philip.</p>
			<p>“You must say ‘sir,’ ” said his uncle.</p>
			<p>“I expect you’ve got a good lot to learn,” the headmaster bellowed cheerily.</p>
			<p>To give the boy confidence he began to tickle him with rough fingers. Philip, feeling shy and uncomfortable, squirmed under his touch.</p>
			<p>“I’ve put him in the small dormitory for the present. … You’ll like that, won’t you?” he added to Philip. “Only eight of you in there. You won’t feel so strange.”</p>
			<p>Then the door opened, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Watson came in. She was a dark woman with black hair, neatly parted in the middle. She had curiously thick lips and a small round nose. Her eyes were large and black. There was a singular coldness in her appearance. She seldom spoke and smiled more seldom still. Her husband introduced <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carey to her, and then gave Philip a friendly push towards her.</p>
			<p>“This is a new boy, Helen. His name’s Carey.”</p>
			<p>Without a word she shook hands with Philip and then sat down, not speaking, while the headmaster asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carey how much Philip knew and what books he had been working with. The Vicar of Blackstable was a little embarrassed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson’s boisterous heartiness, and in a moment or two got up.</p>
			<p>“I think I’d better leave Philip with you now.”</p>
			<p>“That’s all right,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson. “He’ll be safe with me. He’ll get on like a house on fire. Won’t you, young fellow?”</p>
			<p>Without waiting for an answer from Philip the big man burst into a great bellow of laughter. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carey kissed Philip on the forehead and went away.</p>
			<p>“Come along, young fellow,” shouted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson. “I’ll show you the schoolroom.”</p>
			<p>He swept out of the drawing-room with giant strides, and Philip hurriedly limped behind him. He was taken into a long, bare room with two tables that ran along its whole length; on each side of them were wooden forms.</p>
			<p>“Nobody much here yet,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson. “I’ll just show you the playground, and then I’ll leave you to shift for yourself.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson led the way. Philip found himself in a large playground with high brick walls on three sides of it. On the fourth side was an iron railing through which you saw a vast lawn and beyond this some of the buildings of King’s School. One small boy was wandering disconsolately, kicking up the gravel as he walked.</p>
			<p>“Hulloa, Venning,” shouted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson. “When did you turn up?”</p>
			<p>The small boy came forward and shook hands.</p>
			<p>“Here’s a new boy. He’s older and bigger than you, so don’t you bully him.”</p>
			<p>The headmaster glared amicably at the two children, filling them with fear by the roar of his voice, and then with a guffaw left them.</p>
			<p>“What’s your name?”</p>
			<p>“Carey.”</p>
			<p>“What’s your father?”</p>
			<p>“He’s dead.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! Does your mother wash?”</p>
			<p>“My mother’s dead, too.”</p>
			<p>Philip thought this answer would cause the boy a certain awkwardness, but Venning was not to be turned from his facetiousness for so little.</p>
			<p>“Well, did she wash?” he went on.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Philip indignantly.</p>
			<p>“She was a washerwoman then?”</p>
			<p>“No, she wasn’t.”</p>
			<p>“Then she didn’t wash.”</p>
			<p>The little boy crowed with delight at the success of his dialectic. Then he caught sight of Philip’s feet.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter with your foot?”</p>
			<p>Philip instinctively tried to withdraw it from sight. He hid it behind the one which was whole.</p>
			<p>“I’ve got a clubfoot,” he answered.</p>
			<p>“How did you get it?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve always had it.”</p>
			<p>“Let’s have a look.”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t then.”</p>
			<p>The little boy accompanied the words with a sharp kick on Philip’s shin, which Philip did not expect and thus could not guard against. The pain was so great that it made him gasp, but greater than the pain was the surprise. He did not know why Venning kicked him. He had not the presence of mind to give him a black eye. Besides, the boy was smaller than he, and he had read in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Boy’s Own Paper</i> that it was a mean thing to hit anyone smaller than yourself. While Philip was nursing his shin a third boy appeared, and his tormentor left him. In a little while he noticed that the pair were talking about him, and he felt they were looking at his feet. He grew hot and uncomfortable.</p>
			<p>But others arrived, a dozen together, and then more, and they began to talk about their doings during the holidays, where they had been, and what wonderful cricket they had played. A few new boys appeared, and with these presently Philip found himself talking. He was shy and nervous. He was anxious to make himself pleasant, but he could not think of anything to say. He was asked a great many questions and answered them all quite willingly. One boy asked him whether he could play cricket.</p>
			<p>“No,” answered Philip. “I’ve got a clubfoot.”</p>
			<p>The boy looked down quickly and reddened. Philip saw that he felt he had asked an unseemly question. He was too shy to apologise and looked at Philip awkwardly.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
